Multiple Articles: Getting Started: CMake / CLI / Visual Studio (#168)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/get_started/get-started.md

---
title: Install and use packages with CMake
description: Tutorial guides the user through the process of installing and using packages with CMake.
zone_pivot_group_filename: zone-pivot-groups.json
zone_pivot_groups: operating-systems
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 08/23/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
#CustomerIntent: As a beginner C++ developer, I want to learn how to install and manage packages using CMake and vcpkg, so that I can easily set up and maintain C++ projects with necessary dependencies.
---

# Tutorial: Install and use packages with vcpkg

This tutorial shows you how to create a C++ "Hello World" program that uses the `fmt` library with CMake and vcpkg. You'll install dependencies, configure, build, and run a simple application.

## Prerequisites

- A terminal
- A C++ compiler
- [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/)
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

## 1 - Set up vcpkg

[!INCLUDE [setup-vcpkg](setup-vcpkg.md)]

## 2 - Set up the project

1. Configure the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable.

    ::: zone pivot="os-linux,os-macos"

>     ```console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```bash
```

ms.author: javiermat
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 08/23/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
#CustomerIntent: As a beginner C++ developer, I want to learn how to install and manage packages using vcpkg, so that I can easily set up and maintain C++ projects with necessary dependencies.
---

# Tutorial: Install and use packages with vcpkg

In this tutorial you'll create a C++ "Hello World" CMake project using vcpkg and the fmt library. You'll manage dependencies and build and run a simple application.

## Prerequisites

- A terminal to work in.
- `git`, `CMake`, and a C++ compiler installed on your system
- vcpkg installed on your system

## 1 - Set up the project

1. Create the project directory

    This tutorial assumes that your project will be located in a directory named `helloworld`. The `helloworld` directory should be a sibling (or peer) of your vcpkg directory, meaning both should reside under the same parent directory. If you intend to place your project somewhere else, replace any references to that path with your preferred path.
    
    To create the directory and navigate into it, run:

    ```console
    mkdir helloworld && cd helloworld
    ```

2. Create the manifest

>     In this step, you'll create a file named `vcpkg.json` in your project's directory. 
>     
>     From within the `helloworld` directory, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Create a manifest file (`vcpkg.json`) in your project's directory by running the [`vcpkg new`](../commands/new.md) command from within the `helloworld` directory:
```

    ```console
    ../vcpkg/vcpkg new --application
    ```

    The `vcpkg new` command adds a `vcpkg.json` file and a `vcpkg-configuration.json` file to your projects directory. The `vcpkg.json` file should look like this:

    ```json
    {}
    ```

>     This is your manifest file. vcpkg reads the manifest file to learn what dependencies to install. The manifest integrates vcpkg into your C++ project by providing a list of dependencies and supported features that are part of your project. Initially, the file contains an empty JSON object; additional attributes like dependencies and supported features can be added as your project grows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This is your manifest file. vcpkg reads the manifest file to learn what dependencies to install, vcpkg integrates with CMake to provide the dependencies required by your project. Initially, the file contains an empty JSON object; additional attributes like dependencies and supported features can be added as your project grows.
```

>     The `vcpkg-configuration.json` file serves a different purpose. This file allows full control over your dependencies' sources and it's out of scope for this tutorial.

Reviewer: The default `vcpkg-configuration.json` will add baseline constraints to the manifest, so we either make a very basic explanation of what that means or we tell the user to delete the file.

---
title: Install and use packages with vcpkg

> description: Tutorial guides the user through the process of installing and using packages with vcpkg.

Reviewer 2: Should mention CMake.

zone_pivot_group_filename: zone-pivot-groups.json
zone_pivot_groups: operating-systems
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 08/23/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
#CustomerIntent: As a beginner C++ developer, I want to learn how to install and manage packages using vcpkg, so that I can easily set up and maintain C++ projects with necessary dependencies.
---

# Tutorial: Install and use packages with vcpkg

This tutorial shows you how to create a C++ "Hello World" program that uses the `fmt` library with CMake and vcpkg. You'll install dependencies, configure, build, and run a simple application.

## Prerequisites

> - A terminal to work in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A terminal
```

> - A C++ compiler

Reviewer 2: On Windows, this will fail unless the user _specifically_ has Visual Studio installed. I think we should mention that somehow.

- [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/)
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

[!INCLUDE [setup-vcpkg](setup-vcpkg.md)]

## 2 - Set up the project

1. Create the project directory

>     This tutorial assumes that your project will be located in a directory named `helloworld`. The `helloworld` directory should be a sibling (or peer) of your vcpkg directory, meaning both should reside under the same parent directory. If you intend to place your project somewhere else, replace any references to that path with your chosen path.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can just say "Set `VCPKG_ROOT` to your vcpkg directory"? They eventually have to do that anyway.

    
    To create the directory and navigate into it, run:

    ```console
    mkdir helloworld && cd helloworld
    ```

2. Create the manifest

    Create a manifest file (`vcpkg.json`) in your project's directory by running the [`vcpkg new`](../commands/new.md) command from within the `helloworld` directory:

    ```console

>     ../vcpkg/vcpkg new --application

Reviewer 2: e.g.
```suggestion
    $VCPKG_ROOT/vcpkg new --application
```
or
```suggestion
    $env:VCPKG_ROOT\vcpkg new --application
```

    ```json
    {}
    ```

    This is your manifest file. vcpkg reads the manifest file to learn what dependencies to install and integrates with CMake to provide the dependencies required by your project. Initially, the file contains an empty JSON object; additional attributes like dependencies and supported features can be added as your project grows.

    The default `vcpkg-configuration.json` file introduces [baseline](../reference/vcpkg-configuration-json.md#registry-baseline) constraints, specifying the minimum versions of dependencies that your project should use. While this allows for more granular control over your project's dependencies, a detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this tutorial.

## 3 - Add dependencies and project files

Now that the project is set up, add the `fmt` library as a dependency and generate the project files.

1. Add the `fmt` dependency

    Run:

    ```console
    ../vcpkg/vcpkg add port fmt
    ```

    Your `vcpkg.json` should look like this:

    ```json
    {
        "dependencies": [

>         "fmt"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            "fmt"
```

    Create the `main.cpp` file with the following content:

    :::code language="cpp" source="../examples/snippets/get-started/main.cpp":::

    In this `main.cpp` file, the `<fmt/core.h>` header is included for using the `fmt` library. The `main()` function then utilizes `fmt::print()` to output the "Hello World!" message to the console.

## 4 - Build and run the project

1. Run CMake configuration

    To allow the CMake project system to recognize C++ libraries provided by vcpkg, you'll need to provide the `vcpkg.cmake` toolchain file. 

    First, set the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable for the current shell session:

    ::: zone pivot="os-linux,os-macos"

    ```console
    export VCPKG_ROOT=/path/to/your/vcpkg/directory
    ```

    > [!NOTE]
    > Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` using the `export` command will only affect the current shell session. To make this change permanent across sessions, you'll need to add the `export` command to your shell's profile script (e.g., `~/.bashrc` or `~/.zshrc`).

    ::: zone-end

    ::: zone pivot="os-windows"

    ```console

>     set VCPKG_ROOT="/path/to/your/vcpkg/directory"

Reviewer 2: Which terminal type are we assuming (or are we always providing both?) @vicroms 

```cmd
set VCPKG_ROOT=C:\path\to\vcpkg
```
```pwsh
$env:VCPKG_ROOT="C:\path\to\vcpkg"
```

    ```

    > [!NOTE]
    > Setting the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable using the `set` command will only affect the current shell session. To make this change permanent across sessions, you can use the `setx` command and restart the shell session.

    ::: zone-end

    Next, create a `CMakePresets.json` file in the "helloworld" directory with the following content:

    :::code language="cmake" source="../examples/snippets/get-started/CMakePresets.json":::

>     This `CMakePresets.json` file contains a single "default" preset for CMake. It uses version 3 of the schema and sets the `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` variable, pointing to a toolchain file in the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable. This automates the process of specifying the toolchain when running CMake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This `CMakePresets.json` file contains a single "default" preset for CMake. It sets the `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` variable, pointing to a toolchain file in the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable. This automates the process of specifying the toolchain when running CMake.
```

I think this could also use a hint more "why" over "what". It seems pretty self-evident that it will set `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` using `VCPKG_ROOT`, but I think it would help to call out that this is how CMake will consume libraries from vcpkg.

    Finally, configure the build using CMake:

    ```console

>     cmake -B build -S . --presets=default

Reviewer 2: You can include the build directory as part of the preset
